MLGW Board of Commissioners Packet 9-17-25 - excerpt (power transformer award)
Official (full packet): https://www.mlgw.com/images/content/files/board_meeting/boardpacket91725.pdf
Packet date: 2025-09-17; Municipally omitted public records.

----- packet page 2 -----
Board Meeting Preliminary Agenda September 17, 2025 
Board of Light, Gas and Water Commissioners Page 2  
 
CALL TO ORDER AND OPENING REMARKS:  Chairman Pohlman 
 
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE:  Chairman Pohlman 
 
ROLL CALL:  Rodney Cleek 
 
APPROVALS:  Chairman Pohlman 
 Approve Minutes from the Meeting of September 3, 2025. 
 
CITY COUNCIL ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS & UPDATE:  Rodney Cleek 
 Acknowledge receipt of Certified Copies of City Council Resolutions dated 
September 9, 2025, Items 12 through 21, with Same Night Minutes approved for 
Item 20. 
 
PRESENTATIONS:  
 (None) 
 
GENERAL STATEMENT(S) FROM THE PUBLIC:  
 
  
 
CONSENT AGENDA 
       (Items 1 through 13) 
 
PRESIDENT & CEO  
 (None) 
 
SVP, CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER  
 (None) 
 
VP ELECTRIC ENGINEERING & OPERATIONS  
1. Resolution awarding sixty -month purchase orders for power transformers to 
Prolec-GE Waukesha, Inc. and Hitachi Energy as primary partners, and to 
Pennsylvania Transformer Technology as an emergency partner in an amount

----- packet page 6 -----
RESOLUTION SUMMARY 
 
1. Short Title Description – Power Transformers – Sixty-Month Purchase Order 
 
2. Requested Funding – Not-to-Exceed $112,000,000.00 
 
3. Award Duration – 60-Months with the Option of Two, One-Year Extensions  
 
4. Type of Bid – Sealed Bid 
 
5. Awarded To – Prolec-GE Waukesha, Inc., Hitachi Energy, and Pennsylvania 
Transformer Technology 
 
6. Plain Language Description – To purchase 45 power transformers for the sixty-
month period.  The power transformers are needed for master plan capital 
expansion projects and to replace electrical components that have reached end-of-
life at various substation facilities. 
 
7. Impact – The power transformers are needed for master plan capital expansion 
projects and to replace electrical components that have reached end-of-life at 
various substation facilities.  
 
                                            
  
 
 
1
Packet Pg. 6

----- packet page 7 -----
EXCERPT 
from 
MINUTES OF MEETING 
of 
BOARD OF LIGHT, GAS AND WATER COMMISSIONERS 
CITY OF MEMPHIS 
held 
September 17, 2025 
 
   
 
 The Manager of Procurement and Contracts recommends to the Board of Light, Gas 
and Water Commissioners that it awards sixty-month purchase orders for power transformers to 
Prolec-GE Waukesha, Inc. and Hitachi Energy  as primary partners , and  to Pennsylvania 
Transformer Technology as an emergency partner in an amount not-to-exceed $112,000,000.00. 
Sixty-month purchase orders will be awarded for power transformers with the option  of 
two, one-year extensions .  The power transformers are needed for the new re liability plan s, 
replacements, and system spares.  The transformers will replace existing electrical infrastructure 
that has reached end-of-life and for master plan capital expansion projects. 
Bids were opened on July 16, 2025.  Notice to Bidders was advertised.  Twenty -four 
bids were solicited, and seven bids were received with the best complying and most responsive 
bidders being the firms of Prolec -GE Waukesha, Inc., and Hitachi Energy as primary partners , 
and Pennsylvania Transformer Technology as an emergency partner.  This award complies with 
all applicable laws and policies. 
 The 2025 budgeted amount for Substation – Substation Maintenance and Construction is 
$25,157,372.00; the amount spent year-to-date is $17,081,418.29; leaving a balance available of 
$8,075,953.71; of which $ 112,000,000.00 will be spent on this purchase in subsequent budget 
years as approved; and 
 NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED BY the Board of Light, Gas and Water  
Commissioners: 
1
Packet Pg. 7

----- packet page 9 -----
RESOLUTION 
 
WHEREAS, the Board of Light, Gas and Water Commissioners, in their meeting of 
September 17, 2025, approved sixty-month purchase orders for power transformers and is now 
recommending to the Council of the City of Memphis that it approves said purchase; and 
 WHEREAS, sixty-month purchase order s will be awarded for power transformers with 
the option of two, one -year extensions.  The power transformers are needed for the new 
reliability plan s, replacements, and system spares.  The transformers will replace existing 
electrical infrastructure that has reached end -of-life and for master plan capital expansion 
projects; and 
 WHEREAS, bids were opened on July 16, 2025.  Notice to Bidders was advertised.  
Twenty-four bids were solicited, and seven bids were received with the best complying and most 
responsive bidders being the firms of Prolec-GE Waukesha, Inc. and Hitachi Energy as primary 
partners and Pennsylvania Transformer Technology  as an emergency partner .  This award 
complies with all applicable laws and policies; and 
 NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Council of the City of Memphis that 
there be and is hereby approved  sixty-month purchase order s for power transformers from 
Prolec-GE Waukesha, Inc., Hitachi Energy, and Pennsylvania Transformer Technology in a not-
to-exceed amount of $112,000,000.00 chargeable to subsequent budget years as approved. 
1
Packet Pg. 9
