US DOE Office of Electricity - DOE and Industry Team Up to Keep the Lights On for America
Published: 2024-02-22; Author: Michael Pesin, Chief Engineer; Official: https://www.energy.gov/oe/articles/doe-and-industry-team-keep-lights-america; Public domain work under 17 U.S.C. 105.



DOE and Industry Team Up to Keep the Lights On for America | Department of Energy

 Skip to main content

An official website of the United States government

Here's how you know

Here's how you know

Official websites use .gov

 A 
.gov
 website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS

 A 
lock
 ( 

Lock

Locked padlock

 ) or 
https://
 means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

Policy & Priorities

Main Menu

Policy & Priorities

View all Policy & Priorities

Increase American Energy Production

Expanding domestic energy resources to support national needs and economic growth.

Energy Innovation

Driving research and development to shape the future of energy systems and technologies.

Energy Exports

Supporting global energy markets through U.S. energy production and trade.

Affordable Energy for Consumers

Promoting access to reliable and cost-effective energy for households and businesses.

Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR)

Managing emergency fuel reserves to support national energy security.

Nuclear Security

Maintaining the safety, security, and effectiveness of the nation’s nuclear deterrent.

Nuclear Energy

Advancing nuclear technologies to support energy, security, and innovation goals.

Energy Reliability

Ensuring consistent and dependable energy delivery across the nation.

Energy Infrastructure

Strengthening and modernizing the systems that produce, deliver, and store energy.

Leadership & Organization

Main Menu

Leadership & Organization

View all Leadership & Organization

 Chris Wright

Secretary of Energy

 James Danly

Deputy Secretary of Energy

Leadership & Organization Pages

Staff Offices

Supporting DOE operations through policy, administration, and mission services.

Science and Innovation Program Offices

Leading scientific research and technology development across priority areas.

Independent Offices

Providing oversight and specialized functions across key areas of the Department.

Energy Program Offices

Managing programs that support energy production, efficiency, and delivery.

National Laboratories

Advancing research and innovation through DOE’s National Laboratory System.

Nuclear Security Offices

Overseeing national security efforts related to nuclear safety and defense.

 Featured

Hydrocarbons and Geothermal Energy Office

Topics

Main Menu

Topics

View all Topics

Energy Sources

Learn about the resources and technologies used to produce power across the United States.

Energy Usage

Explore how energy is consumed in homes, businesses, transportation, and industry.

Policy

Understand the laws, regulations, and strategies that guide energy decisions and national priorities.

Science & Innovation

See how research, discovery, and new technologies are shaping the future of energy.

Economy

Discover how energy affects jobs, markets, investment, and economic growth.

National Security & Safety

Learn how energy systems support resilience, infrastructure protection, and public safety.

News & Events

Main Menu

News & Events

View all News & Events

 Press Releases

September 10, 2026

Hydrocarbons and Geothermal Energy Office Announces $300,000 to Help Identify Hidden Geothermal Systems

Competitors will develop models and algorithms to support geologic and geophysical… 
Read more

Geothermal

View all Press Releases

 Fact Sheets

FACT SHEET: Delivering on President Trump's Promise to Unleash Prosperity and Security for the United States and Venezuela

FACT SHEET: The Golden Era of American Nuclear Energy Has Arrived

Fact Sheet: Operational Closure of Radioactive Liquid Waste Tanks

View all Fact Sheets

 Upcoming Events

Sep 15

10:00AM EDT - 6:00PM EDT

Permian Energy Dialogues

Sep 17

6:30PM EDT - 8:00PM EDT

Paducah EM SSAB Meeting (September 2026)

Sep 14

9:00AM EDT - 5:00PM EDT

National Clean Energy Week (NCEW) 2026

View all Events

About

Main Menu

About

Mission

Supporting USA energy, science, and security priorities.

History & Achievements

Nobel Prize Laureates

Contact Us

Access general information and ways to connect with the Department of Energy.

Careers

Internships & Fellowships

Apprenticeships & Workforce Development

Work at DOE

Funding Opportunities

Breadcrumb

Office of Electricity

DOE and Industry Team Up to Keep the Lights On for America

Blog

DOE and Industry Team Up to Keep the Lights On for America

The importance of transformer innovation and transformer supply chains to ensure grid reliability.

Office of Electricity

February 22, 2024

Estimated Read Time 

 min

The electrical grid stands as a marvel of modern engineering, intricately designed to transmit power from various sources to end users across vast distances. It tirelessly supplies electricity to buildings, industries, schools, and households, ensuring uninterrupted service around the clock, every day of the year. One of the challenges is the aging grid infrastructure such as transformers—critical components of the power grid. That’s why 
DOE is partnering with industry
 and other stakeholders to ensure that our nation’s grid is reliable, resilient, secure, and affordable while meeting all the demands of the 21st century.

Challenges to Today’s Grid 

Much of our modern grid still relies on century old engineering principles and decades old infrastructure that must meet today’s grid demands–-this includes an unprecedented scale of deployment of renewable generation sources; emerging increase in load demand including new demand for electricity in the transportation sector; and increasing distributed generation (such as solar) that delivers electricity not only to consumers but also back to the grid. Today’s grid also provides never before seen opportunities for consumers to participate in the electricity market, and more.

These new demands put additional pressure on equipment and systems that bring electricity directly to homes and businesses. That includes electrical transformers, the fundamental building blocks of the electric grid. Large power transformers make it possible to transport electric energy over long distances—from where it is produced to where it consumed—and distribution transformers bring electricity to every home, business, or factory.

These distribution transformers present a special challenge. Transformers are ripe for innovation; the transformer design is based on the engineering principles of the 1800s when the electric power industry developed around the alternating current (AC) transformer. It’s long past time for transformer advancements, driven by the researchers and the electric utility industry.

Transformers are one the most basic grid components that are critical for grid operation. As the nation’s commitment to clean energy continues to grow, we need to make sure that transformers can support all these new demands. We need to accelerate innovations in transformer designs, and we have a unique role at the Department of Energy to help the utility industry and manufacturers to advance transformers and the supply chain to ensure a resilient and reliable grid.

 A truck hauls a transformer from EM’s West Valley Demonstration Project to a recycling facility. Funds from recycling are used to offset the site’s cleanup costs.

Addressing Transformer Supply Chains

On top of the new demands on distribution transformers are supply chain challenges for the transformers and their raw materials. It is crucial to ensure a robust supply chain. The lead times for transformer orders, particularly distribution transformers, increased from three to six months in 2019 to 12 to 30 months in 2023. The Covid-19 era revealed stresses on the supply chain for things all of us took for granted, including the equipment that makes up America’s power grid. These stresses were due in part to pent-up post-pandemic demand; difficulty recruiting, training, and retaining a skilled workforce; component supply chain challenges; and materials shortages (grain-oriented electrical steel, aluminum, and copper). Yet this era also spurred innovation in transformer design, which can support increased productivity in manufacturing. 

Government/Industry Partnerships Create Opportunities

This opportunity is being addressed by DOE’s unique convening power. To address supply chain challenges, DOE leaders are engaged with utilities, manufacturers, and other stakeholders. This includes DOE partnership with the Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council (ESCC) to form a Supply Chain Tiger Team of DOE offices, power associations, and a distribution transformer manufacturer. 

The team identified distribution transformers as the most crucial supply chain constraint facing the power system today. Utility trade members reported that between 2020 and 2022, average lead times to purchase distribution transformers across the electric industry and all voltage classes rose a whopping 443%! These same orders that previously took two to four months to fulfill now take 22 to 33 months. This severely limits utilities’ ability to make repairs, order replacements, and connect new customers—all of which threatens reliability and resilience. 

 Distribution line with transformer

 Crews at H Canyon at the Savannah River Site remove an old transformer to make room for new equipment needed for an electrolytic dissolver.

DOE convenes distribution transformers interoperability industry subgroup

In March 2023, DOE convened the industry workshop led by the Office of Electricity with participation from multiple industry stakeholders. The workshop attendees concluded that determined that one contributing factor to the longer distribution transformer production times is the lack of the consistent transformer specifications across the utilities. DOE identified over 80,000 different distribution transformer varieties nationwide. Many are legacy specifications that utilities could modify if they would accept more universal transformer designs and standard accessories included with the distribution transformers. To identify key interoperability opportunities that would be acceptable to utilities and help with reducing production times, DOE convened the OE-led distribution transformer industry subgroup, which includes a diverse set of utility participants and transformer manufacturers.

These opportunities include creating standard definitions and specifications; OE is uniquely positioned to bring together its partners in the utility and manufacturing sectors to agree on core transformer designs, the impact of critical components, and component interchangeability. All these efforts to remove manufacturing bottlenecks and increase transformers production and help to ensure grid reliability.

Next Steps

Whether it’s initiating innovation in transformer designs through recently announced 
FITT
 funding, continuing the work of the OE-led distribution transformer industry subgroup, or advancing research, development, and demonstration for the 21
st
 Century grid, DOE is collaborating with industry to drive the change necessary to ensure a reliable grid.

Partnerships between DOE and the electric utility industry are the key to modernizing our nation’s power grid. The insight that our utility partners share will continue to advance transformers and other critical grid components. DOE is there to help the industry and to use our convening power and the national labs to ensure that electric grid keeps up with demands of the future and is reliable, resilient, secure, and affordable for all.

Michael Pesin

Chief Engineer

As Chief Engineer in the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE)'s Office of Electricity, Michael Pesin brings over 35 years of distinguished experience to the forefront of electric utility innovation. His career is characterized by significant leadership in directing the development and execution of advanced technology programs. 

Before joining DOE, Mr. Pesin spent the majority of his career leading technology organizations at a number of electric utilities, where he developed comprehensive technology strategies, managed complex research and development projects, and guided strategic programs and demonstration initiatives. He further extended his impact by founding and leading a technology management consulting company, serving electric utilities, technology companies, and investors across the U.S. and internationally. Mr. Pesin's commitment to advancing the industry is demonstrated through his board memberships in various technology organizations and his active participation as a frequent speaker within numerous electric power industry groups.

 More By This Author

Microgrids, Large Electric Loads & Grid Support: How to Leverage Microgrids to Support Utilities and Large Load Customers

Lighting the Way at OE: Part 2 - Just like your house, we need a strong foundation for our grid

The April 2019 Global Positioning System (GPS) Week Number Rollover

Grid Innovation at PNNL and ORNL Recognized with Prestigious R&D 100 Awards

Grid Innovation at Sandia National Laboratories Recognized with Two R&D 100 Awards

Dynamic Partners are Essential for R&D Success

Enabling a Smart Power Grid

Explore more on these topics: 

Supply Chains

Energy Sources

Industry

More by this author

 Michael Pesin

 Chief Engineer

 Committed to Restoring America’s Energy Dominance.

Follow Us

Link to Facebook

Link to Instagram

Link to Linkedin

Link to Youtube

Link to X

Link to Flickr

Quick Links 

Leadership & Offices

Newsroom

Contact Us

Careers

Resources 

Budget & Performance 

Directives, Delegations, & Requirements 

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)

Inspector General 

Privacy Program

Federal Government 

USA.gov

The White House 

Open Gov

Accessibility

Privacy

Information Quality

No Fear Act

Web Policies

Vulnerability Disclosure Program

Whistleblower Protection

Equal Employment Opportunity

Notice of Court Orders


